And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
Despite of wrinkles, this thy golden time.
What acceptable audit canst thou leave?
Nor it nor no remembrance what it was.
Leaving thee living in posterity?
From his low tract and look another way.
Who, all in one, one pleasing note do sing;
And, kept unused, the user so destroys it.
Or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove.
Which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish.
And die as fast as they see others grow;
And barren rage of death's eternal cold?
If from thyself to store thou wouldst convert;
To change your day of youth to sullied night;
Can make you live yourself in eyes of men.
And stretched meter of an antique song.
When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st.
For beauty's pattern to succeeding men.
By adding one thing to my purpose nothing.
As those gold candles fixed in heaven's air.
As tender nurse her babe from faring ill.
More than that tongue that more hath more expressed.
Delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee.
And all the rest forgot for which he toiled.
To show me worthy of thy sweet respect.
Makes black night beauteous and her old face new.
When sparkling stars twire not, thou gild'st the even.
From sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate;
Which I new pay as if not paid before.
That due of many now is thine alone.
To march in ranks of better equipage.
The region cloud hath masked him from me now.
To him that bears the strong offense's cross.
Such civil war is in my love and hate
Unless thou take that honor from thy name.
And by a part of all thy glory live.
Eternal numbers to outlive long date.
Which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive,
To bear love's wrong than hate's known injury.
Where thou art forced to break a twofold truth:
And both for my sake lay on me this cross.
Through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay!
I must attend time's leisure with my moan;
Of thy fair health, recounting it to me.
The clear eyes' moiety and the dear heart's part,
And I am still with them, and they with thee;
From whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part;
To guard the lawful reasons on thy part.
More sharp to me than spurring to his side;
But love for love thus shall excuse my jade:
By new unfolding his imprisoned pride.
And you in every blessed shape we know.
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odors made.
That wear this world out to the ending doom.
Return of love, more blessed may be the view.
Save where you are how happy you make those.
Yourself to pardon of self-doing crime.
Or whether revolution be the same.
And nothing stands but for his scythe to mow.
To play the watchman ever for thy sake.
Self so self-loving were iniquity.
My sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life.
That Time will come and take my love away.
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid?
And captive good attending captain ill.
And, proud of many, lives upon his gains?
Robbing no old to dress his beauty new.
To thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds.
To tie up envy, evermore enlarged.
But let your love even with my life decay,
And live no more to shame nor me nor you.
Consumed with that which it was nourished by.
Too base of thee to be remembered.
Save what is had or must from you be took.
Spending again what is already spent.
To take a new acquaintance of thy mind.
And arts with thy sweet graces graced be.
No praise to thee but what in thee doth live.
He of tall building and of goodly pride.
When all the breathers of this world are dead.
In true plain words by thy true-telling friend.
When others would give life and bring a tomb.
Making his style admired everywhere.
Though words come hindmost, holds his rank before.
I was not sick of any fear from thence.
Comes home again, on better judgment making.
Doing thee vantage, double-vantage me.
And haply of our old acquaintance tell.
At first the very worst of fortune's might;
And having thee, of all men's pride I boast.
Happy to have thy love, happy to die!
Thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell.
The basest weed outbraves his dignity.
And all things turns to fair that eyes can see!
If thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state!
And thou away, the very birds are mute;
Drawn after you, you pattern of all those.
But, for his theft, in pride of all his growth
And make Time's spoils despised everywhere.
And to be praised of ages yet to be.
And sweets grown common lose their dear delight.
Than of your graces and your gifts to tell.
Hath motion, and mine eye may be deceived.
Three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords.
They had not skill enough your worth to sing.
While he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes;
But makes antiquity for aye his page,
To leave for nothing all thy sum of good.
A god in love, to whom I am confined.
Nor double penance, to correct correction.
Mark how with my neglect I do dispense:
The crow or dove, it shapes them to your feature.
And to his palate doth prepare the cup.
Crowning the present, doubting of the rest?
But bears it out even to the edge of doom.
But shoot not at me in your wakened hate,
Which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cured.
Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater.
The humble salve which wounded bosoms fits!
By their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown,
To trust those tables that receive thee more.
Made more or less by thy continual haste.
That it nor grows with heat nor drowns with showers.
But mutual render, only me for thee.
And her quietus is to render thee.
Sland'ring creation with a false esteem.
Making dead wood more blest than living lips.
Before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream.
My mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground.
Thy black is fairest in my judgment's place.
And suit thy pity like in every part.
Thou canst not then use rigor in my jail.
So him I lose through my unkind abuse.
One will of mine to make thy large will more.
That nothing me, a something, sweet, to thee.
To put fair truth upon so foul a face?
And age in love loves not to have years told.
That they elsewhere might dart their injuries.
Mad slanderers by mad ears believed be.
Thy proud heart's slave and vassal wretch to be.
Thy pity may deserve to pitied be.
And play the mother's part: kiss me, be kind.
I guess one angel in another's hell.
From heaven to hell is flown away.
Within be fed, without be rich no more.
At random from the truth vainly expressed.
The sun itself sees not till heaven clears.
Commanded by the motion of thine eyes?
With others thou shouldst not abhor my state.
To stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side.
Or made them swear against the thing they see.
And thither hied, a sad distempered guest,
For men diseased; but I, my mistress' thrall,
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
And, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding.
Proving his beauty by succession thine.
