That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
Now is the time that face should form another,
Upon thyself thy beauty's legacy?
The lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell
In thee thy summer ere thou be distilled.
Lifts up his burning head, each under eye
Sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy.
That thou consum'st thyself in single life?
Who for thyself art so unprovident.
In one of thine, from that which thou departest;
And see the brave day sunk in hideous night,
No longer yours than you yourself here live;
And yet methinks I have astronomy-
Holds in perfection but a little moment,
Make war upon this bloody tyrant Time,
If it were filled with your most high deserts?
Thou art more lovely and more temperate.
And make the Earth devour her own sweet brood;
Hast thou, the master mistress of my passion;
Stirred by a painted beauty to his verse,
So long as youth and thou are of one date,
Who with his fear is put beside his part,
Thy beauty's form in table of my heart;
Of public honor and proud titles boast,
Thy merit hath my duty strongly knit,
The dear repose for limbs with travel tired,
That am debarred the benefit of rest,
I all alone beweep my outcast state,
I summon up remembrance of things past,
Which I by lacking have supposed dead,
When that churl Death my bones with dust shall cover,
Flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye,
And make me travel forth without my cloak,
Roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud;
Although our undivided loves are one;
To see his active child do deeds of youth,
While thou dost breathe that pour'st into my verse
When thou art all the better part of me?
What hast thou then more than thou hadst before?
When I am sometime absent from thy heart,
And yet it may be said I loved her dearly;
For all the day they view things unrespected;
Injurious distance should not stop my way,
Are both with thee, wherever I abide;
How to divide the conquest of thy sight.
And each doth good turns now unto the other.
Each trifle under truest bars to thrust,
When I shall see thee frown on my defects,
When what I seek, my weary travel's end,
Of my dull bearer when from thee I speed:
Can bring him to his sweet up-locked treasure,
That millions of strange shadows on you tend?
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give.
Of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme,
Thy edge should blunter be than appetite,
Upon the hours and times of your desire?
I should in thought control your times of pleasure,
Hath been before, how are our brains beguiled,
So do our minutes hasten to their end,
My heavy eyelids to the weary night?
And all my soul and all my every part;
With Time's injurious hand crushed and o'erworn;
The rich proud cost of outworn buried age;
But sad mortality o'ersways their power,
As, to behold desert a beggar born,
And with his presence grace impiety,
When beauty lived and died as flowers do now,
Want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend.
For slander's mark was ever yet the fair.
Than you shall hear the surly sullen bell
What merit lived in me that you should love,
When yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang
Without all bail shall carry me away,
Or as sweet-seasoned showers are to the ground;
So far from variation or quick change?
Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;
And found such fair assistance in my verse
My verse alone had all thy gentle grace;
Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
Or you survive when I in earth am rotten.
And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
And therefore to your fair no painting set.
Than this rich praise, that you alone are you,
While comments of your praise, richly compiled,
Bound for the prize of all-too-precious you,
And like enough thou know'st thy estimate.
And place my merit in the eye of scorn,
And I will comment upon that offense;
Now, while the world is bent my deeds to cross,
Some in their wealth, some in their body's force,
For term of life thou art assured mine,
Like a deceived husband; so love's face
That do not do the thing they most do show,
Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
Some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport.
From thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year!
When proud-pied April, dressed in all his trim,
"Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells,
To speak of that which gives thee all thy might?
For thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed?
I love not less, though less the show appear.
That, having such a scope to show her pride,
For as you were when first your eye I eyed,
Nor my beloved as an idol show,
I see descriptions of the fairest wights,
Of the wide world dreaming on things to come
Which hath not figured to thee my true spirit?
Though absence seemed my flame to qualify;
And made myself a motley to the view,
The guilty goddess of my harmful deeds,
Which vulgar scandal stamped upon my brow;
And that which governs me to go about
Drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery?
Even those that said I could not love you dearer;
Admit impediments. Love is not love
Wherein I should your great deserts repay,
With eager compounds we our palate urge;
Distilled from limbecks foul as hell within,
And for that sorrow which I then did feel
When not to be receives reproach of being,
Full charactered with lasting memory,
Thy pyramids built up with newer might
It might for fortune's bastard be unfathered,
With my extern the outward honoring,
Dost hold Time's fickle glass, his sickle hour;
Or, if it were, it bore not beauty's name;
Upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds
Is lust in action; and, till action, lust
Coral is far more red than her lips' red;
As those whose beauties proudly make them cruel;
Knowing thy heart torment me with disdain,
For that deep wound it gives my friend and me.
And I myself am mortgaged to thy will,
And will to boot, and will in overplus.
Swear to thy blind soul that I was thy will,
That they behold and see not what they see?
I do believe her though I know she lies,
That thy unkindness lays upon my heart;
My tongue-tied patience with too much disdain,
For they in thee a thousand errors note;
Hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving.
One of her feathered creatures broke away,
Which like two spirits do suggest me still.
Breathed forth the sound that said "I hate"
Pressed with these rebel powers that thee array,
For that which longer nurseth the disease,
Which have no correspondence with true sight!
When I against myself with thee partake?
With insufficiency my heart to sway?
Yet who knows not conscience is born of love?
But thou art twice forsworn, to me love swearing;
A maid of Dian's this advantage found,
Laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
That thereby beauty's rose might never die,
And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,
