His tender heir might bear his memory.
Will be a tattered weed of small worth held.
Thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother.
And being frank, she lends to those are free.
And that unfair which fairly doth excel;
With beauty's treasure ere it be self-killed.
Serving with looks his sacred majesty;
Or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy?
The world will wail thee like a makeless wife;
But that thou none lov'st is most evident.
Thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest.
And sable curls all silvered o'er with white;
And your sweet semblance to some other give.
Of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality;
Whereon the stars in secret influence comment;
With means more blessed than my barren rhyme?
Which hides your life and shows not half your parts.
And summer's lease hath all too short a date.
And burn the long-lived phoenix in her blood;
With shifting change, as is false women's fashion;
And every fair with his fair doth rehearse,
Then look I death my days should expiate.
Whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart;
And perspective it is best painter's art.
Unlooked for joy in that I honor most.
To witness duty, not to show my wit;
To work my mind when body's work's expired.
But day by night and night by day oppressed;
And look upon myself and curse my fate,
And with old woes new wail my dear time's waste;
And all those friends which I thought buried.
These poor rude lines of thy deceased lover,
Gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy,
Hiding thy brav'ry in their rotten smoke?
And loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud.
Without thy help, by me be borne alone.
Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth.
For every vulgar paper to rehearse?
And what is 't but mine own when I praise thee?
All mine was thine before thou hadst this more.
For still temptation follows where thou art.
A loss in love that touches me more nearly.
And, darkly bright, are bright in dark directed.
From limits far remote, where thou dost stay.
These present-absent with swift motion slide.
My heart mine eye the freedom of that right.
Or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother,
From hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust!
Called to that audit by advised respects;
"Thus far the miles are measured from thy friend."
Till I return, of posting is no need.
For blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure.
And you, but one, can every shadow lend.
For that sweet odor which doth in it live.
Than unswept stone besmeared with sluttish time.
Tomorrow sharpened in his former might.
Nor services to do till you require.
Being your vassal bound to stay your leisure.
The second burden of a former child.
In sequent toil all forwards do contend.
While shadows like to thee do mock my sight?
It is so grounded inward in my heart.
With lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn
And brass eternal slave to mortal rage;
Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
And purest faith unhappily forsworn,
And lace itself with his society?
Or durst inhabit on a living brow;
Utt'ring bare truth, even so as foes commend.
A crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air.
From this vile world with vilest worms to dwell.
For you in me can nothing worthy prove;
Bare ruined choirs where late the sweet birds sang.
Which for memorial still with thee shall stay.
As 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found:
To new-found methods and to compounds strange?
And of this book this learning mayst thou taste:
And under thee their poesy disperse.
And my sick muse doth give another place.
To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame.
Although in me each part will be forgotten.
Of their fair subject, blessing every book.
The barren tender of a poet's debt.
Which should example where your equal grew?
And precious phrase by all the muses filed.
Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
And prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn.
Against thy reasons making no defense.
And do not drop in for an afterloss.
Some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse;
For it depends upon that love of thine.
Thy looks with me, thy heart in other place.
Unmoved, cold, and to temptation slow,
O, in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose!
Thou mak'st faults graces that to thee resort.
What old December's bareness everywhere!
That heavy Saturn laughed and leapt with him.
Which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells
Dark'ning thy power to lend base subjects light?
So dost thou too, and therein dignified.
The owner's tongue doth publish everywhere.
Than when it hath my added praise beside.
Have from the forests shook three summers' pride,
To one, of one, still such, and ever so.
In praise of ladies dead and lovely knights,
Supposed as forfeit to a confined doom.
That may express my love or thy dear merit?
As from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie.
Made old offenses of affections new.
Than public means which public manners breeds.
So you o'ergreen my bad, my good allow?
Seems seeing, but effectually is out;
And that your love taught it this alchemy,
My most full flame should afterwards burn clearer.
Or bends with the remover to remove.
Whereto all bonds do tie me day by day;
We sicken to shun sickness when we purge;
Still losing when I saw myself to win!
Unless my nerves were brass or hammered steel.
Not by our feeling but by others' seeing.
Beyond all date, even to eternity-
They are but dressings of a former sight.
Weeds among weeds, or flowers with flowers gathered.
Which proves more short than waste or ruining?
Thy lover's withering as thy sweet self grow'st.
And beauty slandered with a bastard shame.
The wiry concord that mine ear confounds,
Savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust;
If hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head.
Thou art the fairest and most precious jewel.
Looking with pretty ruth upon my pain.
But slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be?
Thou wilt restore to be my comfort still.
To thy sweet will making addition thus.
Thus far for love my love-suit, sweet, fulfill.
Yet what the best is take the worst to be.
Unlearned in the world's false subtleties.
Use power with power, and slay me not by art.
The manner of my pity-wanting pain.
Who in despite of view is pleased to dote.
And thou shalt find it merits not reproving.
In pursuit of the thing she would have stay,
The worser spirit a woman colored ill.
But when she saw my woeful state,
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Th' uncertain sickly appetite to please.
That censures falsely what they see aright?
Am of myself, all, tyrant, for thy sake?
And swear that brightness doth not grace the day?
Lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove.
In vowing new hate after new love bearing.
In a cold valley-fountain of that ground,
Came tripping by; but in her maiden hand
