Feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel,
Where all the treasure of thy lusty days,
Disdains the tillage of thy husbandry?
The bounteous largess given thee to give?
To hideous winter and confounds him there,
Which happies those that pay the willing loan;
Resembling strong youth in his middle age,
By unions married, do offend thine ear,
That thou no form of thee hast left behind,
That 'gainst thyself thou stick'st not to conspire,
Without this, folly, age, and cold decay.
Which erst from heat did canopy the herd,
Find no determination; then you were
Pointing to each his thunder, rain, and wind,
Cheered and checked even by the selfsame sky,
And many maiden gardens, yet unset,
And in fresh numbers number all your graces,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed;
And do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed Time,
Gilding the object whereupon it gazeth;
With sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems,
Is but the seemly raiment of my heart,
The perfect ceremony of love's rite,
To find where your true image pictured lies,
But as the marigold at the sun's eye,
May make seem bare, in wanting words to show it,
Intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee,
Do in consent shake hands to torture me,
Featured like him, like him with friends possessed,
For precious friends hid in death's dateless night,
Hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye,
And though they be outstripped by every pen,
With ugly rack on his celestial face,
To dry the rain on my storm-beaten face,
Authorizing thy trespass with compare,
Though in our lives a separable spite,
Or any of these all, or all, or more,
Worthy perusal stand against thy sight,
And our dear love lose name of single one,
I cannot blame thee for my love thou usest;
Beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed;
Thou dost love her because thou know'st I love her,
How would thy shadow's form form happy show
Upon the farthest earth removed from thee,
In tender embassy of love to thee,
A closet never pierced with crystal eyes;
And to the painted banquet bids my heart.
Most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief,
And scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye,
Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
When swift extremity can seem but slow?
Since seldom coming in the long year set,
Is poorly imitated after you;
As the perfumed tincture of the roses,
And broils root out the work of masonry,
Thy hungry eyes even till they wink with fullness,
Whilst I, my sovereign, watch the clock for you,
Th' imprisoned absence of your liberty,
Even of five hundred courses of the sun,
Crawls to maturity, wherewith being crowned,
So far from home into my deeds to pry,
No shape so true, no truth of such account,
And all those beauties whereof now he's king
Advantage on the kingdom of the shore,
Against the wrackful siege of batt'ring days,
And maiden virtue rudely strumpeted,
And steal dead seeing of his living hue?
The right of sepulchers, were shorn away
But those same tongues that give thee so thine own
Thy worth the greater, being wooed of time,
The hand that writ it, for I love you so
To do more for me than mine own desert,
As after sunset fadeth in the west,
The very part was consecrate to thee.
Doubting the filching age will steal his treasure;
And keep invention in a noted weed,
Of mouthed graves will give thee memory;
And heavy ignorance aloft to fly,
Deserves the travail of a worthier pen;
The humble as the proudest sail doth bear,
Though I, once gone, to all the world must die.
Finding thy worth a limit past my praise,
That you yourself, being extant, well might show
That to his subject lends not some small glory,
And like unlettered clerk still cry amen
Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
And for that riches where is my deserving?
Upon thy part I can set down a story
To set a form upon desired change,
Come in the rearward of a conquered woe;
Wherein it finds a joy above the rest.
When in the least of them my life hath end;
Therefore in that I cannot know thy change.
And husband nature's riches from expense;
Making lascivious comments on thy sport,
The basest jewel will be well esteemed,
The teeming autumn, big with rich increase,
Of different flowers in odor and in hue
The lily I condemned for thy hand,
In gentle numbers time so idly spent;
"Truth needs no color with his color fixed,
When I was wont to greet it with my lays,
Look in your glass, and there appears a face
In process of the seasons have I seen,
Still constant in a wondrous excellence;
Of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow,
And the sad augurs mock their own presage;
I must each day say o'er the very same,
Like him that travels I return again,
Askance and strangely; but by all above,
And almost thence my nature is subdued
To know my shames and praises from your tongue;
Of bird, of flower, or shape which it doth latch;
Such cherubins as your sweet self resemble,
Creep in 'twixt vows and change decrees of kings,
That looks on tempests and is never shaken;
And given to time your own dear-purchased right;
To bitter sauces did I frame my feeding;
Whilst it hath thought itself so blessed never!
As I by yours, you've passed a hell of time,
Give salutation to my sportive blood?
Have faculty by nature to subsist;
What thou dost foist upon us that is old,
It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
Lose all and more by paying too much rent,
As thou goest onwards still will pluck thee back,
Fairing the foul with art's false borrowed face,
To kiss the tender inward of thy hand,
Past reason hunted, and no sooner had,
But no such roses see I in her cheeks;
Thy face hath not the power to make love groan;
Better becomes the gray cheeks of the east,
And my next self thou harder hast engrossed;
For thou art covetous, and he is kind;
Not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine?
Ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one.
Be anchored in the bay where all men ride,
Although she knows my days are past the best,
Dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside.
Though not to love, yet, love, to tell me so,
Nor tender feeling to base touches prone,
That have profaned their scarlet ornaments
Cries to catch her whose busy care is bent
Tempteth my better angel from my side,
Chiding that tongue that ever sweet
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
Angry that his prescriptions are not kept,
What means the world to say it is not so?
On whom frown'st thou that I do fawn upon?
That in the very refuse of thy deeds
My nobler part to my gross body's treason.
When I break twenty? I am perjured most,
A dateless lively heat, still to endure,
Which many legions of true hearts had warmed;
