Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
Of his self-love, to stop posterity?
So great a sum of sums yet canst not live?
Beauty o'er-snowed and bareness everywhere.
Or ten times happier, be it ten for one.
Attending on his golden pilgrimage.
In singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear.
By children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind.
Which to repair should be thy chief desire.
And threescore year would make the world away.
Borne on the bier with white and bristly beard;
When your sweet issue your sweet form should bear.
By oft predict that I in heaven find.
And wear their brave state out of memory;
Much liker than your painted counterfeit.
Such heavenly touches ne'er touched earthly faces."
By chance or nature's changing course untrimmed.
But I forbid thee one most heinous crime:
Which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth.
That heaven's air in this huge rondure hems.
How can I then be elder than thou art?
O'ercharged with burden of mine own love's might.
That hath his windows glazed with thine eyes.
For at a frown they in their glory die.
In thy soul's thought, all naked, will bestow it;
Looking on darkness which the blind do see;
How far I toil, still farther off from thee?
With what I most enjoy contented least;
And moan th' expense of many a vanished sight.
But things removed that hidden in thee lie.
Exceeded by the height of happier men.
Stealing unseen to west with this disgrace.
That heals the wound and cures not the disgrace.
Excusing thy sins more than thy sins are.
Yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight.
I make my love engrafted to this store.
When thou thyself dost give invention light?
That due to thee which thou deserv'st alone.
By willful taste of what thyself refusest.
Will sourly leave her till he have prevailed?
Suff'ring my friend for my sake to approve her.
When to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so!
As soon as think the place where he would be.
Sinks down to death, oppressed with melancholy;
And says in him thy fair appearance lies.
And in his thoughts of love doth share a part.
Art left the prey of every vulgar thief.
Shall reasons find of settled gravity;
His rider loved not speed, being made from thee.
In winged speed no motion shall I know.
Or captain jewels in the carcanet.
And you in Grecian tires are painted new.
When summer's breath their masked buds discloses;
The living record of your memory.
The spirit of love with a perpetual dullness.
When you have bid your servant once adieu.
Without accusing you of injury.
Since mind at first in character was done,
And Time that gave doth now his gift confound.
The scope and tenor of thy jealousy?
As I all other in all worths surmount.
Stealing away the treasure of his spring;
Increasing store with loss and loss with store;
Nor gates of steel so strong, but Time decays?
And strength by limping sway disabled,
Roses of shadow, since his rose is true?
Ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay.
By seeing farther than the eye hath shown.
And thou present'st a pure unstained prime.
If thinking on me then should make you woe.
Than niggard truth would willingly impart.
Death's second self, that seals up all in rest.
My spirit is thine, the better part of me.
Then bettered that the world may see my pleasure.
Showing their birth and where they did proceed?
Time's thievish progress to eternity.
And given grace a double majesty.
He robs thee of and pays it thee again.
On your broad main doth willfully appear.
When you entombed in men's eyes shall lie.
Some fresher stamp of the time-bettering days.
Speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow.
That you are you, so dignifies his story.
In polished form of well-refined pen.
Giving him aid, my verse astonished.
And so my patent back again is swerving.
That thou, in losing me, shall win much glory;
I will acquaintance strangle and look strange,
To linger out a purposed overthrow.
All these I better in one general best.
Than that which on thy humor doth depend.
Is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange.
Others but stewards of their excellence.
Naming thy name blesses an ill report.
To truths translated and for true things deemed.
Like widowed wombs after their lords' decease.
Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew.
The roses fearfully on thorns did stand,
And gives thy pen both skill and argument.
But best is best if never intermixed"?
And stops his pipe in growth of riper days.
Dulling my lines and doing me disgrace.
Since first I saw you fresh, which yet are green.
One thing expressing, leaves out difference.
Even such a beauty as you master now.
And peace proclaims olives of endless age.
Even as when first I hallowed thy fair name.
So that myself bring water for my stain.
And worse essays proved thee my best of love.
Pity me, then, and wish I were renewed,
That my steeled sense or changes right or wrong.
Nor his own vision holds what it doth catch.
As fast as objects to his beams assemble?
Divert strong minds to th' course of alt'ring things-
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken.
Which should transport me farthest from your sight.
To be diseased ere that there was true needing.
In the distraction of this madding fever!
To weigh how once I suffered in your crime.
Which in their wills count bad what I think good?
Of thee, thy record never can be missed.
Than think that we before have heard them told.
Whereto th' inviting time our fashion calls.
Pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent?
May Time disgrace, and wretched minutes kill.
But is profaned, if not lives in disgrace.
At the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand.
On purpose laid to make the taker mad.
Than in the breath that from my mistress reeks.
Although I swear it to myself alone.
Doth half that glory to the sober west
A torment thrice threefold thus to be crossed.
Under that bond that him as fast doth bind.
And in my will no fair acceptance shine?
Among a number one is reckoned none.
Whereto the judgment of my heart is tied?
On both sides thus is simple truth suppressed.
Is more than my o'erpressed defense can bide?
No news but health from their physicians know.
To any sensual feast with thee alone.
Robbed others' beds' revenues of their rents.
Not prizing her poor infant's discontent;
Wooing his purity with her foul pride.
And taught it thus anew to greet:
Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end?
Desire is death, which physic did except.
Love's eye is not so true as all men's "no."
Revenge upon myself with present moan?
That in my mind thy worst all best exceeds?
Triumph in love; flesh stays no farther reason,
And all my honest faith in thee is lost.
Against strange maladies a sovereign cure.
Was, sleeping, by a virgin hand disarmed.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
Thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel.
Were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise.
